described as a fountain springing up for the people: “I will pour out a spirit of compassion and supplication on the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and they shall look on him whom they have pierced… On that day, a fountain shall be opened for the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to cleanse them from sin and impurity” ( Zech 12:10; 13:1). 96. One who is pierced, a flowing fountain, the outpouring of a spirit of compassion and supplication: the first Christians inevitably considered these promises fulfilled in the pierced side of Christ, the wellspring of new life. In the Gospel of John, we contemplate that fulfilment. From Jesus’ wounded side, the water of the Spirit poured forth: “One of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and at once blood and water flowed out” ( Jn 19:34). The evangelist then recalls the prophecy that had spoken of a fountain opened in Jerusalem and the pierced one ( Jn 19:37; cf. Zech 12:10). The open fountain is the wounded side of Christ. 97. Earlier, John’s Gospel had spoken of this event, when on “the last day of the festival” ( Jn 7:37), Jesus cried out to the people celebrating the great procession: “Let anyone who is thirsty come to me and drink… out of his heart shall flow rivers of living water” ( Jn 7:37-38). For this to be accomplished, however, it was necessary for Jesus’ “hour” to come, for he “was not yet glorified” ( Jn 7:39). That fulfilment was to come on the cross, in the blood and water that flowed from the Lord’s side. 98. The Book of Revelation takes up the prophecies of the pierced one and the fountain: “every eye will see him, even those who pierced him” ( Rev 1:7); “Let everyone who is thirsty come; let anyone who wishes take the water of life as a gift” ( Rev 22:17). 99. The pierced side of Jesus is the source of the love that God had shown for his people in countless ways. Let us now recall some of his words: “Because you are precious in my sight and honoured, I love you” ( Is 43:4). “Can a woman forget her nursing child, or show no compassion for the child of her womb? Even if these may forget, yet I will not forget you. See, I have inscribed you on the palms of my hands” ( Is 49:15-16). “For the mountains may depart, and the hills be removed, but my steadfast love shall not depart from you, and my covenant of peace shall not be removed” ( Is 54:10). “I have loved you with an everlasting love; therefore I have continued my faithfulness to you” ( Jer 31:3). “The Lord, your God, is in your midst, a warrior who gives you victory; he will rejoice over you with gladness, he will renew you in his love; he will exult over you with loud singing” ( Zeph 3:17).